If we go through, and we have just
a note on this tutorial kit set up here,
there's a kind of drop-down at the top
where you can see all of the course.
And then you'll have these little left and
right buttons to go through the sections.
So we discussed pure functions,
and just to recap,
there are essentially two defining
characteristics of a pure function.
It does not do anything besides
return its return value,
meaning it has no side effects,
like logging to the console, or
maybe writing to a file, or
posting something to an HTTP endpoint.
What have you.
It also is deterministic,
which is another way of saying it
only depends on its input arguments.
So if it depends on some
other state of the world,
like the weather outside the time of day,
it is what happens to be the value
of a certain variable at
this point in the program.
Then that means, like we said before in
our impure greet function, I can call
the function multiple times with the same
inputs and I might get different outputs.
That means it's a non
deterministic function.
In other words,
I can't predict what the output of the
function is gonna be just from its inputs.
So that is not a pure function, and
what we want in pure functions is for
them to be 100% deterministic.
If I call this function a million
times on a million days,
is that even possible in a human lifetime?
[LAUGH] with the same input,
I will always get the same output, okay?
So we are going to take
these considerations.
And use them to work through a little
reading exercise, essentially.
So in this next section, pure or not,
you've got a little function file here,
pure or not JS, which has a bunch
of little and some of them.
Different types of functions in here.
And your mission should you choose to
accept it is to read through these and
then in the comments, think through and
decide whether each function is pure or
not, and just write for yourself,
mostly a few words about why that is.
>> Anjana Vakil: All righty, so I am going
to do to commit a sin of teaching right
now where I am going to do something
that I want you to know is possible but
I do not want you to do right now.
Okay, you will notice that the little
solve button up in the right corner.
Don't click it cuz it will replace
what you've written in your editor
with my reference solution.
So this is gonna become a little bit
more useful as we work with actually
executing code samples.
But right now I'm gonna click it so
you can see my answers and
then we will discuss and compare.
Sound good?
So there are some spoilers, but
let's go through these functions
one at a time, so get time.
Hopefully everyone is on the same page,
so this function is not pure, yeah,
is this what folks have said?
Okay, can anybody tell me
why they thought so yeah.
>> Speaker 2: It's not deterministic.
>> Anjana Vakil: Non deterministic
if I call it a different times,
I will get a different time
because it's the time.
Okay, how about compare date strings?
What about this one?
Do we agree that it is,
as I labeled it, pure?
Okay, now in this case, is there anything?
Did anybody have a different answer?
Did anybody have any question marks
around, wonderings about this one?
Because there is one thing
that's a little eyebrow
raising in this function,
>> Speaker 3: I assume you have to rely on
the fact that day would be
purely functional as well.
>> Anjana Vakil: So date, this date
function, which here, if we notice,
is not passed in as an argument.
So that is something
outside of the function.
But this is a built-in in the language.
So we can be pretty reasonably sure
it's not gonna change between lines
of code execution.
And we have to know whether or not.
We have to know its behavior.
We have to know whether or
not this is going to always give me the
same result if I pass in the same string.
And in this case, it will.
So there are some asterisks on
the never look at anything else in
the rest of the world that I said before,
for example,
built ins are something
that we'll be using, and
there's some more in the rest of this,
right, as we'll go through.
The link on the on the side indicates
MDN is a web developer's best friend.
And so if we wanna find out what
a particular built in does, we can
go to MDN to check out if it's going to
be a deterministic pure operation or not.
Cool, all righty how about string to JSON?
Are we all on the same page?
This one is similarly pure.
Again, we have that JSON built in, but
we can rely on it being predictable.
So, sweet, bow about file to
JSON I'm seeing thumbs down.
I am seeing disgusted faces.
[LAUGH] can anybody explain
what is not pure about this?
>> Anjana Vakil: File to JSON?
>> Speaker 4: It depends
on a file that's outside?
>> Anjana Vakil: It depends on
something outside of the function.
This file that I'm
looking up by file name,
anything could happen to that
between runs to this function.
So if I run it today, and
then tonight my coworker edits the file.
Cool, and then tomorrow I run it again,
expecting the same output,
I will be very upset.
So this is what we want to avoid
by not doing things like this.
And we'll talk about momentarily
how we actually do anything [LAUGH]
when we can't do this stuff.
Okay, add pretty pure,
pretty simple sum question marks.
So I'm going to put
an asterisk on this one.
Did anybody have a different
answer to some here?
Now, I am saying this is impure, but
there is an asterisk on that because
we're gonnna talk a little bit
later about how to work with data
that we don't want to ever change.
But in JavaScript, by default,
>> Anjana Vakil: Even
though I'm taking in this
num array as the argument,
this function is still not pure.
Because it's not
necessarily deterministic.
Can anybody help me explain why?
Why might this not be deterministic?
What could happen that could
ruin our functional purity here?
The thing is, this array, even though it's
being passed in, and I'm looking at it,
arrays are something that my coworker over
on the other team can mess with, right?
Arrays are what we call
mutable in JavaScript.
So if I'm expecting this function
to return the same result
tomorrow as it does today.
But then it turns out that my coworker
pushed a whole bunch of new values
to that array, even though I'm
passing in the same array object,
I might get a different value.
Now that's a gotcha.
So there's a little tricky one.
I'm asking you, but
I think that if we can force ourselves to
work with arrays that we
know will never change,
which we will talk about how
to do later in the course.
Then we could consider
this a pure function.
Logical XOR,
this is a logical operator exclusive or
we got a little arrow fat
arrow syntax here going on.
But that doesn't change the purity.
And as we can see, it's a pretty
simple series of Boolean evaluations.
So does everybody agree with
me that this is a pure one?
Cool, truth table?
Anybody see anything weird going on in
here that I just said was a bad idea?
[LAUGH]
>> Speaker 5: Arrays.
>> Anjana Vakil: Yeah, so
we got arrays going on and
we got this push operation, right?
Which is changes the actual array.
We're pushing new values to it.
However, all of that is happening
inside of the function.
So this isn't something that's gonna
be giving us different results at
different times.
So we can have in the JavaScript case,
not in languages that enforce functional
purity, but in JavaScript which does
not force you to write pure functions,
you can have a pure function
that is deterministic.
And has no side effects, that contains
less functional things like mutation,
but as long as we're wrapping it up in
the purity of the functional definition,
we can still be productive
functional programmers.
So this is what I think is awesome
about doing functional programming in
JavaScript.
We don't have to go 100%,
it's not all or nothing.
We can start functionalizing
our code little by little,
wrapping things up to make sure that
if we're doing any impure things,
they're at least happening in the safe,
little sandbox inside of the function.
And we'll be talking more
about that in one moment.
Okay, now what about this one,
the XOR truth table
that uses our XOR and
our truth table to do something.
Why is this not a pure function?
>> Speaker 6: Log into the console.
>> Anjana Vakil: 110 into the console.
We already saw it side effects.
Now, if I were returning
a string representing the value
of the truth table itself,
that would be a different matter.
But logging to the console, even though
this is gonna do the exact same thing
every time I run it, unless somebody
replaces, redefines console.
Or whatever, which, again, JavaScript
doesn't force us to do functional things,
we are going to be getting
the same output every time but
it is an effect on the world,
and that is not pure cool.
Okay, now we're getting into
a little bit more realistic code.
So some of this is is actual,
like real world code from GitHub.
And again, we're using some built ins,
or some things that are.
Kind of not passed into the functions,
like encode URI component.
So, we might want to refer
to our good friend MDN
to check on any of that,
but when we look at this
encode string, and
feel free to check my facts.
But encodeuri component is
a pure deterministic function
that's always going to
return the same encoded.
>> Anjana Vakil: String based
on the same input string or
based on its given input string.
So in this case, we are using a pure
function inside of our function and
doing nothing else, so we have purity.
>> Anjana Vakil: Now we have encodeArray,
which with that same asterisk
similar to before,
where we're passing in an array value,
and then we're doing something with it.
We're not changing it, But
my coworker might be in some other code.
That's part of this.
So that's the gotcha here.
And then we come to
the last one in code value.
So did folks think this was pure, impure?
I thought it was a zoom here,
perhaps you can help me
understand your reasoning.
If you got the same answer, yep,
>> Speaker 7: It's calling encode array
which is above it,
>> Anjana Vakil: Bingo, so
encode array we just said with that,
gotcha of arrays being mutable
in JavaScript and
we could consider an impure function.
And so when we use an impure function,
it kind of infects whatever
function we're using it in.
So this encode value is infected
by the impurity of ENCODE array,
and therefore also becomes impure Here.
So one little impurity is
enough to ruin the impurity
of an entire function or program even.
And that's a challenge, right?
How do we do real things when
we can't log to the console,
[LAUGH] we can't write the files,
we can't read files, [LAUGH] we can.
Can't make fetch requests like,
what are we supposed to do?
And that's perhaps one of the major like?
We need to wrap our heads around
as functional programmers.